In this chapter, we will dive into the world of Node.js and learn how to create a simple web server. A web server is a crucial component in web development as it handles incoming HTTP requests and sends back appropriate responses. With Node.js, we can easily build a web server that can handle these requests efficiently.

To get started, let's first install Node.js on our machine. You can download the latest version from the official Node.js website (https://nodejs.org). Once installed, open your terminal or command prompt and type `node -v` to verify that Node.js is successfully installed.

Now that we have Node.js up and running, let's create a new directory for our project. Open your terminal or command prompt and navigate to the desired location. Then, run the following command:

```
mkdir simple-web-server
cd simple-web-server
```

Next, let's initialize a new Node.js project by running the following command:

```
npm init -y
```

This command will create a `package.json` file, which will keep track of our project's dependencies and other important information.

Now, let's install the `http` module, which is a built-in module in Node.js that allows us to create an HTTP server. Run the following command:

```
npm install http
```

With the `http` module installed, we can now start building our web server. Create a new file called `server.js` and open it in your favorite text editor.

In `server.js`, we need to require the `http` module and create a server instance. Add the following code:

```javascript
const http = require('http');

const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
  res.statusCode = 200;
  res.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/plain');
  res.end('Hello, World!');
});

server.listen(3000, 'localhost', () => {
  console.log('Server running at http://localhost:3000/');
});
```

Let's break down the code:

- We first require the `http` module and assign it to the `http` variable.
- Then, we create a server instance using the `createServer` method. This method takes a callback function as an argument, which will be executed whenever a request is made to our server.
- Inside the callback function, we set the status code of the response to 200, indicating a successful response.
- We also set the `Content-Type` header to `text/plain`, specifying that the response will be plain text.
- Finally, we send the response back to the client with the message "Hello, World!" using the `end` method.

To start our web server, open your terminal or command prompt and navigate to the project directory. Then, run the following command:

```
node server.js
```

You should see the message "Server running at http://localhost:3000/" in the console, indicating that our server is up and running.

Now, open your web browser and navigate to `http://localhost:3000/`. You should see the message "Hello, World!" displayed on the page.

Congratulations! You have successfully created a simple web server using Node.js. This is just the beginning of what you can achieve with Node.js in web development. In the upcoming chapters, we will explore more advanced concepts and techniques to build robust and scalable web applications using Node.js.